so what actually creates behavioral
change if we really look at our brain
our learning circuitry which is kind of
we can think about our hippocampus as a
part of our brain that sort of relates
to learning circuitry is very closely
connected to our emotional circuitry and
specifically our negative emotional
circuitry and so in order for us to
change our behavior the most powerful
thing that can change behavior is
actually the experience of negative
emotion so I'm working with someone
who's engaged and it turns out that he
recently found out that his wife I mean
his fiancee was unfaithful and so like
that caused him a lot of emotional hurt
and also like drastically changed his
behavior towards her right if we think
about like the way that you treat your
fiancee you treat them one way which is
like a very intensive behavior in a
positive direction you treat them with
love and respect earn and are available
for them and then after he discovered
that she was unfaithful his behavior
changes like 180 degrees it flips
completely and it's the most drastic
behavioral change that you can kind of
think of so his behavior changes
drastically and one way to think about
that is like if we think about how he
has changed he's learned not to trust
his wife so if we think about
behavioural change and learning like
those two things are very closely tied
and if we think about what's the most
rapid way that our behavior changes it's
actually negative emotions let's say
that you go to school one day and you
get bullied for like wearing a
particular shirt that negative emotion
is gonna hit your brain so hard that you
will never wear that shirt at school
again it is going to completely alter
your behavior very drastically
and so even if we stop and accept that
for a moment if we say that okay fine so
getting burned is how we learn things
and it's the most drastic way to change
our behavior what does this have to do
with gaming so this is where we start to
look at something called fMRI studies
which are brain scan studies so fMRI is
a kind of study where we take an MRI
which is like a scan of your brain
trem our eye research sort of supports
this is that it actually suppresses your
negative emotions right if I'm having a
bad day at work or I just got into a
fight with like my significant other or
my parents are on my case what do you do
to forget your problems you go to a
video game right because while you're
playing a video game you forget what's
going on in life and so if we look at
fMRI studies what what video games
actually do is they shut off our
negative emotional circuitry but now
let's pause and think for a second
escapism exactly so if I shut off my
negative emotional circuitry what
happens to my capacity to learn exactly
it gets stunted right because our
emotional circuitry our negative
emotional circuitry exactly you learn
from failure so our negative emotional
circuitry is a key way in which we learn
because when we get burned by something
like let's just talk about actually
getting burned if I touch a hot pan or I
touch a hot stove and I get burned
I'm never gonna touch a hot stove again
remember that learning circuitry is get
tied to your negative emotional
circuitry so when people suppress the
parts of their brain that experience
negative emotions they don't learn from
their mistakes they don't learn from
their behaviors and they have trouble
getting unstuck so another prime example
and this is something that it shares
with alcohol is alcohol right so when I
drink and like I get into a fight with
someone or I'm not doing well at work
instead of sitting with those feelings
and letting those feelings motivate me
to do more and change and learn if I
drown my sorrows in alcohol nothing is
gonna happen because I'm literally
shutting off that painful which is
relief right and so that that creates
escapism and the problem with escapism
is that it doesn't help us change and so
then gamers end up feeling stuck right
because you guys wake up every day and
you know that there are things that you
need to be doing differently and you
know exactly what it is because y'all's
fluid IQs are 20% higher than average
and yet you can't bring yourself to do
it and you just can't bring yourself to
do it and you know and you know and you
know and you can't do it and you can't
do it and you can't do it and then you
come to a conclusion which is that I'm
lazy normally like negative emotions
cause us to change in in our life
because we direct those negative
emotions towards real life what happens
in gaming is that we start to like a lot
of like if you think about people who
rage in video games it's usually like
people who are like upset in the rest of
life right like if you think about a
hateful gamer like some guy who just
gets completely bent out of shape over
every little thing and overwatch chances
are that guy's not happy in the rest of
his life
so gaming has a very interesting impact
on how we experience emotions and one
thing that it does and I think this has
to do with gamers kind of getting stuck
is it suppresses their negative emotions
and by suppressing our experience of
negative emotions it actually disables
our learning circuitry and by disabling
our learning circuitry what that manages
to do is it keeps us feeling stuck
because our learning circuitry is what
leads to behavioral change
so you're basically turning off the part
of your brain that is the most powerful
thing that can cause you to change your
behavior and then the end result is that
you end up sort of living a life where
like you know what you need to do but
you feel incredibly frustrated because
nothing in your life is changing